---
layout: page
title: "Study-level and individual-level meta-analysis"
tagline: "Study-level and individual-level meta-analysis (SLMA&ILMA)"
---
{% include JB/setup %}

The barriers to individual-level data access described in section 1 cannot simply be ignored. They reflect real societal concerns about privacy, confidentiality and the ownership and exploitation of scientific data and intellectual property. Fortunately, however, approaches have been developed that allow pooled analyses to be carried out that are felt not to violate ethico-legal and governance stipulations. For example, much of the recent progress in our understanding of the genetic variants that cause a range of common chronic diseases (e.g. cancer, coronary artery disease, diabetes, asthma and arthritis ([Hindorff et al., 2009](/references)) has arisen from pooled analyses where the analysis is based on what may be called ‘**Study-Level Meta-Analysis**’ (**SLMA**)([Wolfson et al., 2010](/references)) or aggregate-level analysis ([Sutton et al., 2008](/references)). Here the association between each gene and the disease of interest is first estimated in each study separately. The study-specific measures of the magnitude of each association (e.g. odds ratios) are then taken and combined to calculate an ‘overall odds ratio’ for all studies together. This is in effect a ‘weighted average’ of the odds ratios in each of the separate studies that takes appropriate account of the amount of information in each study (e.g. large studies count more heavily). This approach is very effective. Furthermore, in most settings the overall odds ratio obtained from the SLMA is very similar - both in size and uncertainty (e.g. its 95% confidence interval) - to the result that would have been obtained if the analyst had actually been able to take all of the individual-level data from each subject in all of the studies combined and pooled them all together in one large data file and then carried out a single global analysis. A single large analysis of this latter nature typically requires that appropriate allowance is made for systematic differences between studies (often called adjustment for the ‘effect of centre’) and it may then be called a full ‘**Individual-Level Meta-Analysis**’ (**ILMA**)([Wolfson et al., 2010](/references)). Equivalently this may be called an IPD meta-analysis([Sutton et al., 2008](/references)) (because it is based on individual patient/participant data ) while bioinformaticians would typically refer to it as an analysis based on microdata ([Gomatam et al., 2005](/references), [Karr et al., 2007](/references)).