---
layout: page
title: "The need for DataSHIELD"
description: ""
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Given the potential to use either SLMA or ILMA why does pooled data analysis still present unresolved challenges? In fact, these challenges are implicit to the realistic responses to two key questions: 

1. Why have clinical genomicists and genetic epidemiologists used SLMA so much more widely than individual-level meta-analysis in the recent past? ([Hindorff et al., 2009](/references), [Fortier et al., 2010](/references))
2. Why should we not continue to use SLMA in preference to ILMA in the future?

The answer to the first question follows directly from the description of SLMA above: unlike ILMA, SLMA avoids the need to pass any individual level data from the collaborating studies to the analysis centre. In consequence, many ethical committees, study oversight committees and scientific advisory boards have been happy to conclude that even if ethico-legal restrictions prohibit the transmission of individual-level data to third parties (thereby preventing conventional ILMA) it is entirely acceptable for study investigators to analyse their own data and then to pass the summary statistics generated by those analyses to an analysis centre to provide a foundation for a pooled SLMA. This indicates an implied principle that - provided they carry no sensitive information about individual participants and no information about their identity – mathematical summary statistics can be passed to a third party for the purpose of pooled analysis –even if the transfer of individual level data is prohibited.

The answer to the second question is that, despite its many benefits, conventional SLMA is very inflexible in one critical regard. Specifically, a given pooled analysis can only be undertaken if it has been defined ahead of time, the investigators in every study have carried out the required analysis and have transmitted the appropriate summary statistics to the analysis centre. Thus, if three studies have each estimated the one half million associations between 500,000 genetic variants and a disease of interest, and have each passed the summary statistics reflecting these associations to the analysis centre, SLMA can easily be used to estimate the overall associations (pooled across all three studies) for each of the 500,000 variants. But whereas, a simple - indeed, obvious - next step in the analysis of a single study would be to determine whether there are any sex-specific effects amongst those variants that exhibited a significant association, such an analysis would be fundamentally impossible under SLMA unless each study had also been asked ahead of time to provide summary statistics for the one half million sex-gene interactions reflecting each of these sex-specific differences.

As bioscience progresses, scientists are increasingly faced with analyses that involve assessments on a wide variety of important demographic factors, vast numbers of genetic variants, numerous biomarkers, and many other measures of the physical and social environment. Furthermore, the range of different models that may be fitted is vast (e.g. different measures of disease, alternative combinations of potential causative factors etc). It is therefore clear that a rational approach to analysis will usually involve a substantial element of exploration. Unfortunately, this exploration will be prohibitively inefficient if it is undertaken as part of a conventional SLMA: where progress is halted after every analysis as the investigators in all studies are asked to produce the new summary statistics that are required to move the analysis forward. Ideally, therefore, an approach to pooled analysis is needed that is as flexible and efficient as ILMA and yet is as fundamentally secure as SLMA; the latter security being guaranteed by avoiding the need for any individual-level data to be transmitted to the analysis centre. By avoiding the need to transmit these data, it is to be hoped that such a method would be viewed as ethico-legally acceptable, even when restrictions exist that explicitly prohibit the passing of individual-level data to third parties. **DataSHIELD** (Data Aggregation Through Anonymous Summary-statistics from Harmonized Individual levEL Databases) has precisely these characteristics.